projects/stratus.md, before:

---
path: /project/stratus
title: Stratus
subtitle: Realtime weather visualization in AR
synopsis: "An app that reads encoded weather data and presents it in augmented reality so pilots are able to instantaneously understand the current conditions."
tags:
    - big projects
    - data viz
    - ar/vr
image: /uploads/stratus1.png
timeframe: 8 Weeks (Summer 2019)
project_type: Project completed while interning at Booz Allen Hamilton
tools:
    - Unity 3D
disp_order: 0
---

# The Problem

One of the major challenges faced when analyzing data is visualization. There are methods of data visualization that can display particular aspects of a dataset, such as a chart or graph. The problem is that they are limited in terms of _what kind of data can be visualized_, as well as _the speed someone is able to understand_ the data being represented.

One particular domain of data that has this problem is weather data. There's a _huge amount_ of data being generated, and understanding it _quickly_ is often of the utmost importance, especially for pilots.

Over the summer, I and a team of other interns ([Luke Fleck](http://lrfleck.com/), [Hannah Schenk](https://www.hannahschenk.com/), and [Connor Pan](https://github.com/NameClassified)) at Booz Allen Hamilton worked on solving this problem and creating a working prototype.

# Our Solution

We used Unity to create an augmented reality app to present realtime weather data in a form that can be instantaneously understood. This involved:

-   Fetching and decoding realtime weather reports provided by all airports in the United States ([METARs](https://aviationweather.gov/metar)).
-   Generating an AR environment that adapts to the current decoded report, displaying cloud levels, air pressure, wind speed and direction, and other elements from the reports.
-   Creating an app to easily facilitate entering airports and visualizing their AR environments.

# My Role

I worked on both designing and developing the app with Unity, primarily on the last two points above. This involved creating a simple UX that presents just the right amount of information to the app's users, as well as additional specificity when required. There are two main sections that needed to be considered: a 3D AR visualization and 2D UI.

## The AR Visualization

For the augmented reality environment, it was important that _just_ that data that was most often needed by pilots be presented. This meant focusing on how to visualize specific parts of the METAR report, like clouds and wind. The answer was to go with the most intuitive solution: what do these _look like_?

By building on people's pre-existing understanding of what weather looks like physically, we could create something that was _instantaneously understandable_ without any additional training.

![](/uploads/stratus.gif)

It was also important to consider how people would interact with the AR environment. We were sure to provide a number of obvious interaction methods, such as panning around and scaling.

## The 2D UI

However, it was also clear that there are some aspects of the weather report where a visualization would not provide enough information. One example is pressure, where pilots use the pressure provided by a METAR to calibrate their alitimeter. It would be important to provide these values in addition to the visualization, to provide additional clarity when needed.

I designed a UI to present the fields from the METAR in their original numeric form, available with a swipe up from the bottom of the screen.

![](/uploads/stratus1.png)

![](/uploads/stratus2.png)

Commit message:

update stratus project with more pics

projects/stratus.md, after:

---
path: /project/stratus
title: Stratus
subtitle: Realtime weather visualization in AR
synopsis: "An app that reads encoded weather data and presents it in augmented reality so pilots are able to instantaneously understand the current conditions."
tags:
    - big projects
    - data viz
    - ar/vr
image: /uploads/stratus5.png
timeframe: 8 Weeks (Summer 2019)
project_type: Project completed while interning at Booz Allen Hamilton
tools:
    - Unity 3D
disp_order: 0
---

# The Problem

One of the major challenges faced when analyzing data is visualization. There are methods of data visualization that can display particular aspects of a dataset, such as a chart or graph. The problem is that they are limited in terms of _what kind of data can be visualized_, as well as _the speed someone is able to understand_ the data being represented.

One particular domain of data that has this problem is weather data. There's a _huge amount_ of data being generated, and understanding it _quickly_ is often of the utmost importance, especially for pilots.

Over the summer, I and a team of other interns ([Luke Fleck](http://lrfleck.com/), [Hannah Schenk](https://www.hannahschenk.com/), and [Connor Pan](https://github.com/NameClassified)) at Booz Allen Hamilton worked on solving this problem and creating a working prototype.

# Our Solution

We used Unity to create an augmented reality app to present realtime weather data in a form that can be instantaneously understood. This involved:

-   Fetching and decoding realtime weather reports provided by all airports in the United States ([METARs](https://aviationweather.gov/metar)).
-   Generating an AR environment that adapts to the current decoded report, displaying cloud levels, air pressure, wind speed and direction, and other elements from the reports.
-   Creating an app to easily facilitate entering airports and visualizing their AR environments.

# My Role

I worked on both designing and developing the app with Unity, primarily on the last two points above. This involved creating a simple UX that presents just the right amount of information to the app's users, as well as additional specificity when required. There are two main sections that needed to be considered: a 3D AR visualization and 2D UI.

## The AR Visualization

For the augmented reality environment, it was important that _just_ that data that was most often needed by pilots be presented. This meant focusing on how to visualize specific parts of the METAR report, like clouds and wind. The answer was to go with the most intuitive solution: what do these _look like_?

By building on people's pre-existing understanding of what weather looks like physically, we could create something that was _instantaneously understandable_ without any additional training.

![ ](/uploads/stratus.gif)

It was also important to consider how people would interact with the AR environment. We were sure to provide a number of obvious interaction methods, such as panning around and scaling.

## The 2D UI

However, it was also clear that there are some aspects of the weather report where a visualization would not provide enough information. One example is pressure, as pilots use the pressure provided by a METAR to calibrate their alitimeter. It would be important to have these values in addition to the visualization, to provide additional clarity when needed.

I designed and implemented a UI to present the fields from the METAR in their original numeric form, available with a swipe up from the bottom of the screen.

![](/uploads/stratus1.png)

![](/uploads/stratus2.png)

A few more screenshots from the app:

![](/uploads/stratus3.png)

![](/uploads/stratus4.png)

![](/uploads/stratus5.png)
